Hi and welcome back.
In this video we're talking about dictionaries and objects.
And we're going to introduce this concept`
of object-oriented programming.
Now the way I've got planned to introduce this to you,
I'm pretty chuffed with.
I think this is gonna be quite understandable,
so let's get on it and see how it turns out.
We've looked at dictionaries as things that we can use
to represent things in our programme.
For example, we can have a dictionary
that represents a student.
We can say my student is equal to this in your dictionary.
Has a name
and potentially has some grades,
something like that.
Now in our programme, this dictionary represents
what we think of a student.
And another part of our programme,
we may do things like print out the student's name
or calculate the average grade of the student
and use this dictionary as though it was a student.
Even though of course we know that real students
in the real world have a lot more properties like an address
and, you know, a family and things like that,
in our programme, we don't care about those other properties.
We only care about the properties that we're going to use.
So in our programme, this dictionary can represent a student.
And if we expand our programme and we need more properties,
we can always modify the structure
of this dictionary and add them in.
And this concept of having something
that represents a real-world entity is pretty powerful
in programming and it allows us to start thinking
of our programmes in terms of what they do
as opposed to how they do it.
Let's move on and assume we want to calculate
the average grade of this student
so that we can, for example, put it
in some sort of report somewhere.
I think you can already calculate the average grade
of this student quite easily, so I'm going to ask you
to pause the video and give this a go.
Try to implement a function that will return
the average grade of this student.
I hope you got that.
What we're going to do is we're going to define
an average grade function.
It's going to take one parameter
that is going to be the student,
then a colon at the end, of course,
and all it's going to do is it's going to add up
the grades that we're gonna do with the sum
of the student grades and it's going to divide that sum
by the length of the student grades.
The length, again, is the count
of how many there are, and there are four in this case.
And naturally, it's going to return that calculation.
So now if we wanted to print out the average
of my student, we can do that.
Again, all we're doing here is
we are evaluating my student.
It's just a dictionary.
We're calling the average grade function
with that as an argument.
So the value of my student, this dictionary
will then go into the student parameter.
And that's going to return these calculations here.
And then we're going to print that out.
So let's run it.
As you can see, we get eighty-six point seventy-five,
which sounds about right.
However, and here comes the interesting bit,
there is a flaw with this entire programme.
I'm going to just delete that.
The flaw is not in the code. The code is totally fine.
It does what it's meant to do;
it calculates the average grade
the student as a dictionary is defined up there.
All the code works and it prints out
or it gives us the value that we want.
The flaw is in its design.
Not in user interface design, but in software design.
This is a concept, and I hope a topic,
that the majority of coding tutorials out there
just completely skip over.
I think it's pretty important and I think
it's a good way to explain an object-oriented programme.
The flaw in the software design is that
these two functions are
essentially unrelated.
Even though they are very closely
or seemingly closely related
they are essentially disjoined.
And what I mean to say by that is
you've got this function and in a large programme,
potentially you could have a function somewhere
in a totally different file altogether
that gives you the average grade.
And in a different file altogether,
you could have this student.
So these could be in completely
different places physically, in a large project.
However, we say that these two things are tightly coupled
in that the average grade function requires
that the parameter be a dictionary
and it requires that the parameter
have the key grades in it.
In order to be able to fulfil its purpose
it's totally fine for a function to have those requirements,
but not when it's also possible for the function
to be in a completely different place.
Because then, let's say you wanted
to change grades or results, for example.
You'd have a mayhem if you've got functions
all over the place that rely on the student
to have a grades key but now you changed it.
So this is the flaw in the design of this programme.
We've got a function that is not
living with the student,
but is tightly coupled to that student.
To this dictionary structure.
So it would be great if we could
have our function living inside the dictionary.
So that it lives in the same place
as the data that it acts on.
Something like this.
Let's say we add a new key here that's the average
and this is like something that calculates average.
This could be a function that calculates
the average of a student. Of this student, specifically.
So, currently, with these grades,
this should be eighty-six point seventy-five.
But, of course, if we add another grade,
say, one hundred, this should go up to like,
ninety, or something.
This value here must be a function in order
that it can be recalculated every time
that the grades change.
However, we cannot do that with a dictionary.
A dictionary will not allow us to put a function here
that acts on the data inside that same dictionary.
It's just not possible.
Sorry.
So, we must use objects for this,
because the object is the natural progression
in this dictionary usefulness thing where it
will allow us to act on the data that the object holds.
So we can begin the thinking of objects just
as a starting point of a thing that holds data,
in this case name and grades, and it can
also hold actions to do with that data.
In this case, calculating the average.
So, I'm actually, sorry,
I'm going to keep that here for
as we implement our object definition,
we're going to refer back to it.
So, what I'm going to do now, now that we know
that an object stores data and actions to do with that data,
is I'm going to define that object
and this is going to be quite confusing to begin with,
but I want us to stick to it.
We're going to define the objects,
then we're going to create the objects,
those are two distinct steps,
then we're going to explain exactly what's going on.
What I want you to understand in terms of these objects
is that they are just things that store data.
Data can be a name, the grades,
and it can also store these actions.
So, let's start by defining what an object looks like.
And we do that with a class.
Okay, the class is for something
that defines what the objects are.
Inside the class. So, we've got the keyword class,
then we got the name of the class.
And normally in python they
start with an uppercase letter.
And then we've got a colon. Now we know
that after a colon, things must be indented more.
And as you can see, repl.it already suggests
that we put four spaces in front.
Now, inside this class, indented is four spaces.
We're going to define two functions.
And this is pretty weird, because so far we've
been defining functions and in the top level
of indentation that's at the very left of the page.
Now, we're going to define them inside the class.
And that's going to mean that the class
is going to contain these functions. Okay.
Let's start by defining the function,
which is a special function called underscore underscore,
that's two separate underscores, init underscore underscore.
In python, these functions with two underscores
in front and two underscores at the back,
they are special functions
and they're called dunder functions.
So this would be a dunder init.
Dunder for double underscore.
This init function is going to take three parameters.
The first one is self. The next one is going
to be new name, and the next one
is going to be new grade.
These parameters can be called anything you want.
I'm picking self for a particular reason,
and these can be anything, but these are going
to be the name and the grade that we're
going to store in our object.
And inside it we're going to say self dot name.
Whoa. Completely wrong there.
Self dot name equals new name.
And self dot grades equals new grades.
And I'm gonna make sure to make it new grades.
Okay. Moving on to the second function.
It's going to be an average grade function,
pretty much like the one we've got here.
I'm going to call it average and it's going
to take a single parameter called self.
Then again the colon and then what it's gonna return
is the sum of self dot grades divided
by the length of self dot grades.
I appreciate this is just me typing
and you watching.
And now let's begin to explain exactly
what is going on here.
But before we can do that,
before we can explain this scary syntax here,
we have to define, or rather, we have to create an object.
What we've defined here, is we've
defined the object's structure.
We're now going to create an object.
So, we're going to create an object called student one.
And the way we create a new object in python,
is we call the class like so.
Here we've got an opening and closing bracket there,
and that creates a new object of type student.
And so this student class now gets called
using these brackets as if it were a function
and that creates a brand new object.
So what is an object?
And think of an object as just
something that can store data.
And we're going to tell it what data to store.
So inside this student call here, sorry about that,
We're going to put two things.
We're going to put Rolf Smith and we're also
going put seventy, eighty-eight, ninety, and ninety-nine.
Now, what's happening is, first things that's
going to happen is this call here is
going to create a brand new object.
An object is a completely empty thing,
or a more or less empty thing that allows us to store data,
and allows us to store actions.
When the object is created, that's created
before we call any of these functions.
Then it immediately calls this dunder init function.
So the object is first created and then it immediately
calls this dunder init function.
The new empty object that was just created
gets passed to self as the first parameter.
So self is now an empty, blank object
that has essentially nothing in it.
And the way that python is structured,
it then gives Rolf Smith as a new name the second parameter,
and this list as the new grades third parameter.
I am so confused, thinking about zero and ones here.
So, very, very important, self is a blank object
that was created before we called this dunder init function.
New name is the first argument here,
new grades is the second argument here.
Now, we know that when we get into the first line,
we now have these values.
Self is a blank object, and now what we're going
to do is use the dot to access something inside this object.
And what we're going to access is this name thing.
Now, let me tell you, because it's a blank object,
it does not have anything called name inside it.
It doesn't have a variable called name inside it.
So what this is doing, is it's
creating a new variable called name,
that lives inside this blank object
that we are calling self.
Of course, you can call it whatever you want.
You can call this my boject, if you want,
or you can spell it right and call it my object.
And that's totally okay, yeah, that's totally fine,
you can do that if you want,
but the convention is to call it self.
Okay. In python, it will always be called self,
even though you can call it whatever you want.
So we've got this empty object, and inside of it,
in this dot, we're defining the name variable.
We're giving the variable the value of new name,
which is Rolf Smith.
So now, what was previously a completely
blank object is no longer blank.
It contains this name variable.
And in the second line, we're doing the same thing.
We're getting our now not blank object
and we're defining a grades variable inside of it.
And the value of that is the new grades list
that we passed here.
Now, before we move on to the average function,
I want to make sure that this is clear.
And if we print,
student one,
this is the object
that we've created, dot name, we're going to get:
Oh, we've done something incorrect here.
Oh, yeah, sorry. We've missed something here.
I'm just going to put none there for the time being.
If we print out student one dot name we get Rolf Smith.
That is what we defined up here.
All that's happening again, student
is creating an empty object and that's
getting passed with a dunder init that's self.
New name is Rolf Smith. New grades is here.
And all we're doing is resigning new variables
inside of self and we're giving it
the values that we've passed it.
So the student object is an entity that can store data.
And the way that we store data
in it is by using this dot name.
However, student one knows that it
is a student with capital S.
And the way that we can do that is we
can access some special property of it
that is underscore underscore class.
We can run that and then you see that it is class student.
That's the type.
So student one knows it's a student thing,
and it has now a name and grades defined in it.
If we were to define student two,
make it equal to another student,
for example, Jose and give it some grades
of fifty, sixty, ninety-nine, and one hundred,
I got better towards the end of the term,
then we can print student two dot name
and we can run that.
And notice how it says Jose and we can print
student one dot name
and notice how now it says Jose and Rolf Smith.
So these two things are completely different entities,
completely different things.
They both know they are students,
and they both have this name variable
that we've declared in here, but of course,
if we wanted, each one could have a different property.
Y'know, that's something you can do if you were so inclined.
And they don't care about exactly what they are.
All that they know is that because we've
defined it inside of here, and we've called
this dunder init method, they now have a name,
the value of that name is what we passed in here.
Nothing magical is going on.
Just data is being passed from one place to another
and that's really what programming is all about.
Okay, now that we've created our object
and we know we can create multiple objects
and they're all just independent blank things
that we've assigned these variables, we're ready
to go into the next step, which is looking at this average.
Let's do that in the very next video. I'll see you there.